---
layout: "post"
title:  "Poli Sci: Paper on Venezuelan Crisis"
date:   2020-01-18 19:36:55 -0700
published: false
categories: poli
---
*I wrote this paper in March 2016 for my Latin American politics course. At that time, the crisis in Venezuela was just beginning and many people were quick to conclude that the it was due to the collapse of the oil industry. Although the explanation is somewhat correct, it misses the reason why the oil industry failed in the first place. The answer, as it turns out, is not just economic, but mostly political. My argument is based on a poli sci classic, the institutional theory.
Since the crisis is still ongoing, I thought sharing this paper still holds some value. It had received an excellent mark and was nominated to be published in an academic journal. I hope this will be ....   *

### Venezuela’s Financial Crisis: Is Oil Economics the Only Answer?

I argue that a weak institutional arrangement that doesn’t have the capacity to resist against the unproductive demands of maximizing oil revenues, causes policy-makers to take economic decisions that ultimately lead to the type of economic problems Venezuela has and is still experiencing. When politics revolve around oil and the institutions that deal with oil sector are weak prior to the arrival of an oil sector expansion, the consolidation of a system of rent-seeking and corruption is unavoidable. In the first four paragraphs I establish that a purely economic approach is not enough to explain the underlying reasons behind the type of economic disaster that Venezuela went through. I compare two countries which experienced similar economic effects of the expansion of oil sector, but have fundamentally different political frameworks and institutional structures. The difference in their respective experiences with the oil sector leads to a study of politics and institutions to explain the situation. The rest of the paragraphs examine what type of institutional structure might cause the economic troubles. I find that the state ownership of subsoil rights, lack of a diverse tax-base, inability of institutions to constrain each other, political maneuvers of presidents to maintain their power, and a loss of accountability among the public reinforce an unbreakable system of rent-seeking, bribery, corruption and political repression.

Petroleum is the primary source of fuel for countless vehicles, machines and industries around the world. The world consumes an estimated 92 million barrels of petroleum every day (OPEC February 2016). The oil and gas exploration and production industry makes up between 4.6% and 6.5% of the global economy. A single commodity contributing an approximate $100 trillion to the world economy, proves how important the oil trade is for the world. Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), an alliance of 13 countries with abundant resources, holds 80.8% of the world’s total proven oil reserves; OPEC’s reserves account to an approximate 1,200,000 million barrels (OPEC Annual Statistical Bulletin 22). In 2014 Venezuela, an OPEC member, had almost 300,000 million barrels, which is 87% of all Latin American reserves, and 20% of world’s total oil (OPEC Annual Statistical Bulletin 22).

Venezuela’s rapid exploration of new reserves has maintained its oil abundance and role as the fifth largest exporter in the world for decades (Kozloff 7). It is, thus, expected that a country like Venezuela should easily be able to accumulate wealth through oil trade. In fact, this was precisely the situation. Between 1920 and 1976, Venezuela had the highest per capita income in the continent, and a higher average growth rate than even that of advanced industrial countries (Karl 234). Between 1960 and 1980, which included two oil price booms, Venezuela had more investment, higher wages and longer life expectancy than any other Latin American country (Karl 234). However, by 1980 this success was over. According to World Bank in 1989 poverty in Venezuela was 53%. (Karl 235). By 1993 Venezuela was in massive debt (Mommer 29). Today official reports from Caracas state that the inflation rate is 141.5 per cent; IMF estimated far worse than this number and stated that Venezuelan economy is currently the third sharpest decline in the world (Financial Times). With its experience in the oil industry, Venezuela possessed many prerequisites for making productive use of its oil windfall (Karl 20). So how did a country like Venezuela come to the situation it is in today? Economists think that a phenomenon called the Dutch Disease causes this type of economic decline (Karl 5).

Dutch Disease is a theory whereby the rise of one particular sector-often natural resources- and the nontradeable services that come with it, inhibit the growth of industrialization and agriculture (Karl 5). There is no doubt that the petroleum industry is problematic for overall development. Unlike manufactured goods and agriculture products once found, oil and gas are easy to extract and require virtually no need for supporting development (Karl 50). The transportation is through pipelines, which don’t require surrounding infrastructure to be developed (Karl 52). It is a highly capital-intensive business, which means that a lot of resources are spent to import technology (Karl 52). Oil is often refined or processed in advanced countries. Only a small portion of the workforce has the required technical training, which creates what is often regarded as “labour aristocracy” between the skilled and unskilled (Karl 48). Oil reserves are depletable and often owned by foreign actors (Karl 47). These are all elements by which Dutch Disease explains economic underdevelopment. It can be observed that all the aforementioned declare the natural character of oil to be a destructive force (Karl 6). However, after all oil is just a liquid material (Karl 6). If a theory like the Dutch Disease is to be the sole reason for issues that oil exporters face, it can be said that every country with substantial oil business will experience the same extent of problems through Dutch Disease. However, examining the case of Norway clearly concludes that that is not the case.

Although not as much as Venezuela, Norway discovered substantial oil reserves in 1962.  It went through a similar process of initial economic success followed by symptoms of Dutch Disease like rising inflation, debt and deficit (Karl 214). However, never in its modern history did Norway experience a crisis as severe as that of Venezuela (Karl 215). There were no coups, no complete economic meltdown, no political crisis, no revolution, and no stagnation of its other sectors. Researchers believe that the Dutch Disease doesn’t distress the economies of first-world nations, but is observed mostly in the third world (Coronil 7). In the following parts I will explain the reasons for this variation more in detail. For now the case of Norway is used to demonstrate that an economic theory isn’t solely enough to explain the relation between oil and economic performance. Despite being a powerful one, Dutch Disease can’t explain the underlying factors that set off the peculiar reaction that countries have in the first place (Karl 5). The extent of Norwegian reaction and experience of the oil market was substantially different than that of Venezuela. This difference wasn’t caused by the Dutch Disease (Karl 5). It was caused by a difference in the political and economic institutions of these countries, and the underlying principles of these very institutions (Karl 7). The Dutch Disease was an outcome of this institutional difference; it further exacerbated the overall experience, but it was not the cause (Karl 28).
An influx of wealth by the export of natural resources both affects and is affected by the entire framework of decision-making (Karl 44). This framework includes a wide range of concepts varying from the state’s capacity to collect and distribute taxes to how the public interacts with oil wealth based on its relationship of accountability with public institutions. I will explain this framework in two categories: economic and institutional.

The economic category involves the development of a petro-state, how it is unproductive, how it becomes almost entirely dependent on imports for other goods, how it fails taxation, finds itself in debt and so on. As the Venezuelan oil exports expanded, the national currency (bolivar) gained value against other currencies (Boué 179). However, for traditional agricultural exports to be competitive, there needs to be currency devaluation. This change in Venezuela’s currency caused traditional exports like coffee and cacao to stagnate. By 1929 oil became 76% of Venezuela’s export earnings, and had replaced coffee as the most valuable export commodity (Boué 179). The sharp decline of agriculture replaced the traditional non-oil elite with a rapidly urbanized petroleum workers class (Karl 82). Especially during boom cycles the demand for labour in oil sector increased, which further caused masses to leave their previous occupations and transition to the oil sector (Boué 180). This new unproductive new class demanded expenditure on education, health, infrastructure and welfare, all of which were financed from oil revenues (Karl 83). To understand the reason why the aforementioned class is regarded as “unproductive”, we need to define how oil sector creates a different type of economic output compared to other sectors. Oil exporters depend on the capability of its reserves to generate rents based on the behaviour of world petroleum markets (Karl 48). The most distinctive characteristic of mineral rents is that they have virtually no productive contribution to local economy (Karl 48). The economic basis of such states, is their ability to extract these rents from mineral sectors (Karl 49). Oil rents of Venezuela were so extraordinary that the rapid growth in employment and capital flow created an illusion of economic success; while in fact Venezuela’s level of productivity and diversity of its economy were significantly low (Karl 235). The ability of Venezuela to divert its economy from oil rents depended on its capacity to establish a non-rentier, productive, oil-independent and developmental economic base. It is important at this point to recognize that it was virtually impossible for Venezuela to transition to such an economy, however, not because it was cursed with the intrinsic characteristics of oil, but because of reasons that will be explained under the category of “Institutions”.

In order not to compromise long-term generation from other sources of income, Venezuelan officials decided on increasing state intervention and expenditure to use oil wealth for creating an alternative economic base (Karl 84). They now supposedly had the financial means to develop industrial programs and improve standard of living (Karl 25). The state used its petrodollars to initiate massive programs of employment, import-substitution industrialization, and hydrocarbon projects (Karl 27). Taxes were reduced and subsidies were implemented. A handful of state-owned companies were in charge of a massive scale of industrial output (Boué 185). These enterprises couldn’t be successful and accumulated a significant deficit for the state (Boué 185). The subsidizing of domestic oil prices contributed to increasing government debt and inflation (Karl 29). Later on Pérez government tried to increase domestic oil prices, but failed because oil was considered to be collectively owned by the people as their birthright (Coronil 376). Domestic market prices always stayed below the export prices since oil was seen as a “common property” the price of which was determined by the Minister of Energy and Mines, who was the personification of the landlord of oil reserves (Mommder 21). Import substitution regulations didn’t allow non-oil goods to be exported; oil remained virtually the only thing Venezuela exported (Boué 184). Venezuela’s reliance on petrodollars translated into an unwillingness and inability to tax its population (Karl 61). From 1971 to 1973 the percentage of non-oil tax revenue to non-oil GDP was lowest among major oil exporters around the world (Karl 62).

As much as the oil rents increased, the state leveraged more (Boué 191). Soon the government spending surpassed oil revenues and the state found itself in foreign debt (Boué 191). To pay for costs, the government increased the taxes on PdVSA, the state-owned oil company (Boué 190). The government ordered 5.5 thousand million dollars to be converted to Bolivar and be transferred to the Central Bank of Venezuela (Mommer 18). This fiscal policy nearly completely exhausted PdVSA’s once abundant funds (Boué 188). The falling of international oil prices put the national oil company into a much more difficult position (Mommer 34). However, even during the oil windfalls the government’s economic policies led it to decline in GDP (Boué 187). The state tried to reduce prices to fix the situation, but these attempts exacerbated the economics. With high interest rates, price controls on agriculture, overvalued currencies, curtailed imports and unrealistic exchange rates the private sector diminished and caused an extreme capital flight (Boué 186). By 1988 Venezuela’s debt was 41.4% of its Gross National Product (GNP); comparatively Brazil’s debt was significantly lower at 26.3% of its GNP (Karl 174).

To sum up, Venezuela’s economic policies undermined its attempt to “sow the oil” and diversify its economy. Its dependence on oil rents had become more than ever to sustain what was left of the economy. The Venezuelan government failed its quest. The question of why Venezuela adopted these wrongs policies can be answered with the study of its institutions.

The institutional category explains the difference in Venezuela’s experience to that of Norway to be caused by the difference in the pre-existing institutional structures of these countries within which oil economics was inserted (Karl 236).  States that don’t have strong institutions prior to the introduction of oil industry, have similar trajectories that lead them to underdevelopment and economic crisis (Karl 12).  While Venezuela hadn’t properly built the political basis of decision-making before exporting oil, Norway had. Before oil was explored, Norway was one of the most democratic and liberal countries in the world with a diverse tax base, entrenched civil service, enhanced private sector, effective judiciary, no corruption, high horizontal accountability and an overall impressive level of state capacity (Karl 216-217). The professional and strong institutions of Norway created an intentional resistance to the demands of those who benefited from a completely oil-based economy (Karl 216). The weak and undefined institutions of Venezuela couldn’t apply any resistance to those demands (Karl 73). These demands were designed to maximize the output of oil sector and made it impossible for Venezuela to break away from its oil-lead trajectory. The state-owned oil company had the strongest connections with national producers of services required by the petroleum industry (Mommer 34). However, there was no economic environment to develop or maintain links with non-oil sector (Mommer 34). This trajectory didn’t only lead Venezuela to economic devastation, but also to political instability and underdevelopment. For instance, the democratic and relatively stronger institutions of Chile, another mineral based economy, helped it to maintain an effective bureaucracy and rule of law, and prevented it to experience an economic and political meltdown that Venezuela had (Karl 236). Today unlike Venezuela, Chile enjoys a fairly stable economy and the highest Human Development Index (HDI) among all Latin American countries.

A country’s economic policies of accumulation and distribution are shaped by its political institutions and also shape those very institutions in return (Karl 236). These economic policies are created by policymakers who, if influenced by the oil sector, acquire particular paths that prioritize incentives leading to further extraction of oil rents. Oil, though indirectly, shapes the behaviour of government officials and private citizens. States that lack strong institutions and capacity can’t restraint these government officials, and thus anything can happen as long as oil rents are protected. This was the case in Venezuela. Government control and cronyism are good examples that demonstrate how this concept manifests itself.

The advantage of agriculture-based economies is that the cultivated oil belongs to the private agricultural producers. The revenues of the agricultural output are distributed through economic competition which includes state revenues by taxation (Coronil 83). On the other hand, the land beneath which oil reserves are belongs to the state through subsoil rights (Coronil 83). In a country with weak institutional capacity, the executive can then exercise absolute control over every branch of the government with no institutional restraint. In presidentialist systems, this shift concentrates an unprecedented degree of power in the president. Juan Vincente Gómez, a military general who ruled Venezuela as the supreme dictator for many years, used subsoil exploitation to consolidate his power and enrich his friends (Coronil 8). As the sole owner of mineral reserves, the state had become the centre of revenue accumulation through rent seeking (Karl 15). To maximize oil rents by political means Gomez appointed friends, relatives and loyal colleagues to positions of legislator, governor, district chief, judge, councilmen and police officer (Karl 79). Gomez, overwhelmed by the enormous wealth generated from oil rents, further changed the fundamental structures of political and economic institutions to maintain this order. In addition, the deliberate interference on the functioning of democracy helped foster institutions that advance rent-seeking and hence further undermined the possibility of a future democratic regime (Karl 93). For Gomez and every government that followed, rent-seeking had become the central organizing principle of political and economic life (Coronil 8). As petrodollars dominated the fiscal realm, a further tendency toward rent-seeking became institutionalized (Karl 63). These rents were so much that government officials were able to extract enormous wealth and generate very high income from them (Karl 15). The temptation of the wealth that oil generated for the president, public authorities, foreign companies, and anyone who was involved in rent-seeking activities, was a very strong incentive to maintain the status quo (Karl 15). The notion that oil was the core national identity and that the state was responsible of safeguarding it soon became norm (Coronil 81). The state’s understanding of “safeguarding” was to shape political institutions into mechanisms of oil extraction and rent-seeking (Karl 140). Rather than building administrative institutionalization, bureaucratic coherence and mechanisms of productive decision-makings, the petrostate of Venezuela increased its jurisdiction on corruption and rent-seeking, and became a “weak giant” (Karl 60). The distrust towards government bureaucracy and political institutions increased everyday (Coronel 253).

Due to its complete reliance on petrodollars the state never sought to tax the population (Karl 61). There was no clear separation between public income and private income; public income via petrodollars was all the state was interested. This approach undermined the vital link between taxation and state building (Karl 61). The link was that through taxation the state can develop fiscal accountability toward their citizens. Without fiscal accountability the citizens find themselves in a dilemma in which they don’t pay for government services and therefore can’t rely on them. Government services are created and maintained by the economic and political institutions of the state. Therefore, the state’s taxation incapability translates into a loss of institutional accountability. In fact by 1992 a mere 2% of the population thought that political institutions of Venezuela were “reliable” (Karl 184). Even though the state’s grip on oil expanded and its jurisdiction increased, its authority on institutions decreased (Karl 91). The lack of authority and capacity transformed the Venezuelan state into a “huge milk cow that benefited those who were able to suckle at her teats” (Karl 91). The citizens, having no institutional and fiscal accountability, started seeking oil rents as well. Rent-seeking became entrenched not only in the government, but in the population, and in the process of time the people stopped demanding institutional accountability altogether. Without institutional accountability public agencies had no mechanism of checking abuses and violations of law originating from other institutions. To clarify we can compare the dynamics of Venezuelan experience to public’s reaction to a corruption scandal of Petrobras, the Brazilian state-owned petroleum company.

Much like Venezuela, Brazil controlled an oil company that generated enormous revenues. Petrobras was one of the fifteen largest oil companies in the world with an annual output of USD 130 billion (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 88). In 2013 a massive scandal of corruption and money laundering worth an estimated USD 31.5 billion was revealed (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 88). Among those involved were twenty-one Congress members, thirteen former Congress members, fifteen senators, and one former governor including Brazil’s former president Fernando Collor de Mello, the Senate President, the President of the House of Representatives, President Rousseff's former Chief of Staf and a former Minister of Energy (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 88). An engineering manager who was also involved, admitted that corruption at Petrobras was “endemic and institutionalized” (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 91). Many countries such as Canada terminated business relations with Petrobras under their laws that debar companies from doing business with the government if the company has been convicted of crimes in another country (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 95). Petrobras gradually lost 80% of its market value and was unable to pay its debts (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 96).

The difference between Venezuela’s experience of oil industry and that of Brazil was the resistance by institutions against rent-seeking and corruption. In Venezuela every public institution, government official and gradually the public itself reinforced the system that maintained an order of corruption. With no institutional and fiscal accountability the extent of corruption grew to be massive with virtually no constraint from the judiciary or any other branch of government. Whereas in Brazil the strong institutional capacity of law enforcement immediately brought the Petrobras scandal to the Supreme Federal Court (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 97). The Brazilian people hadn’t lost institutional accountability and demanded judicial institutions to perform their functions. Brazilian accountability was so strong that any attempt to remove Sergio Moro, the federal judge in charge of the case, from his position was promptly denounced (Arruda de Almeida & Zagaris 91). Just recently prosecutors sought the arrest of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president of Brazil, due to his involvement in the Petrobras scandal. Following the prosecutor’s decision Dilma Rousseff, the current president of Brazil, appointed him as her Chief of Staff, which is a very powerful cabinet position in Brazil. Cabinet ministers in Brazil have a special judiciary immunity which protects them against all prosecutors except the Supreme Court. Rousseff’s appointment of Lula shows that there still exists some entrenched institutional problems in Brazil. However, the independence of the judicial branch, the constraints that institutions apply upon each other, and massive protests that follow incidents like Lula’s appointment prove that there is a high level of institutional accountability in Brazil. The outcome of institutional accountability is institutional resistance and constraint, which is what limited the corruption in Brazil to Petrobras whereas in Venezuela the extent of corruption and rent-seeking was nation-wide.


In effect the economic policies of a country lead it to overall development. However, these economic policies are shaped by policymakers who are entities of an institutional framework the character of which varies among nations. The structure of economic policy is profoundly political (Karl 240). If fundamental structures of institutions are governed by politics that revolve around oil, the output is highly unproductive and negative. In Venezuela oil politics encouraged and reinforced a system of rent-seeking and corruption, with no non-oil tax base. This created an unfavourable economic environment and weak institutions that didn’t have the capacity to resist against the demands of the oil sector. The strength and capacity of the institutional framework within which oil is inserted determines whether the country is in an unproductive and unbreakable oil-led trajectory or not. It is that productivity of a country that leads to development; an influx of money creates the illusion of wealth, but it is prone to the possibility of sudden erosion through an international fiscal crisis or a mistake originating from the very economic policies undertaken by the government.

### Bibliography
Arruda de Almeida, Monica; Zagaris, Bruce. *"Political Capture in the Petrobus Corruption Scandal: The Sad Tale of an Oil Giant."* Fletcher Forum of World Affairs 39.2 (2015): 87-100.
Boué, Juan Carlos. Venezuela: The Political Economy of Oil. Oxford: Published by the Oxford UP for the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, 1993. Print.

Karl, Terry Lynn. *The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-states.* Berkeley: U of California, 1997. Print.

Coronel, Gustavo. *The Nationalization of the Venezuelan Oil Industry from Technocratic Success to Political Failure.* Lexington, MA: Lexington, 1983. Print.

Coronil, Fernando. *The Magical State: Nature, Money, and Modernity in Venezuela.* Chicago: University of Chicago, 1997. Print.

Fast FT.*"IMF Sees Venezuela inflation at 720% this year”.* Fast FT. Web. 17 Mar. 2016. <http://www.ft.com/fastft/2016/01/22/imf-sees-venezuela-inflation-at-720-this-year/>

Kozloff, Nikolas. *Hugo Chávez: Oil, Politics and the Challenge to the United States.* New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. Print.

Mahonjr., James E. *"Was Latin America Too Rich to Prosper? Structural and Political Obstacles to Export‐led Industrial Growth."* Journal of Development Studies 28.2 (1992): 241-63. Web.

Mommer, Bernard. *"The Political Role of National Oil Companies in the Large Exporting Countries: The Venezuelan Case."* Oxford Institute for Energy Studies (1994). Web. <http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.392.8448&rep=rep1&type=pdf>

Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. *“Monthly Oil Market Report February 2016”* Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC): 10 February 2016. Web. <http://www.opec.org/opec_web/static_files_project/media/downloads/publications/MOMR%20February%202016.pdf>

Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. *“Annual Statistical Bulleting”* Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC): 2015. Web. <http://www.opec.org/opec_web/static_files_project/media/downloads/publications/ASB2015.pdf>

Romero, Simon. *"Brazil Prosecutors Seek Arrest of ‘Lula,’ Former President, in Graft Case."* The New York Times. The New York Times, 10 Mar. 2016. Web. 17 Mar. 2016. <http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/world/americas/brazil-seeks-arrest-of-ex-president-da-silva-in-graft-inquiry.html?rref=collection/timestopic/Petroleo Brasileiro SA Petrobras>
